<!-- markdownlint-configure-file { "MD024": { "siblings_only": true } } -->

# Day 27 - Convolutional neural networks

Useful for inputs not as vectors but as **images**.

## Real Life Applications

- Object detection
- Facial recognition
- Image segmentation
- Automatic image captioning

## Image data preprocessing

An image is a tensor of size (_width_, _height_, _channels_)

**Tensor** is an array of 3 or more dimensions.

### Resizing

Lower the image resolution.

### Intensity normalization

Neural networks are _faster_ if inputs are normalized around (-1, 1)
Pixel intensity can be transformed from (0, 255) to (-1, 1) or (0, 1)

### Data augmentation

Creating additional data based on the original data.

- Crop
- Mirror
- Rotate
- Color transformation

### Data loader

The preprocessing is not done directly to the images for computational reasons.
We can load and transform data _``batch by batch_
`keras.preprocessing.image_dataset_from_directory`

## Network architecture

We shouldn't flatten an image because it generates _too many parameters_ with large images.

### Convolutions

Element-wise dot multiplication (not matrix multiplication).

$Image x Kernel = Convolved feature$

Density kernel = $$\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 2 & 3\\
a & b & c
\end{bmatrix}$$

In images with colors we have 3 kernels, one for each pixel. The they are summed.
We add an initial and final row and column so the final convolved shape is equal to the original shape.

_Convolution layer_ is composed of many _filters_, each _filter_ composed by _$n$ kernels_ (where _$n$_ is the number of inputs).

A _flatten_ operation can be applied in the edge, the layer before the end.

### Kernel weights

The weights are randomly initialized and then learned during `model.fit()`

### Parameters

The number of parameters _does not depend_ on the image shape.
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have a lot less parameters than _dense_ networks (but require lots of RAM)

Input of 3 channels, 6 filters.

```py
6 * (3 * 3 ^ 2 + 1)
```

Second layer of 4 filters, input of 6 channels.

```py
4 (6 * 3 ^ 2 + 1)
```

### Keras syntax

```python
model = models.Sequential()

model.add(layers.Conv2D(6, kernel_size=(3, 3), activation='relu', input_shape=(225, 225, 3)))
model.add(layers.Conv2D(4, kernel_size=(3), activation='relu')) # kernel_size = 3 <==> (3, 3)
model.add(layers.Flatten())
model.add(layers.Dense(1, activation='sigmoid'))
```

### Intuition about kernels

The feature extraction is done directly by the model. You do not have to extract features by intuition.

## Convolution hyperparameters

### Strides

```python
# Default stride = 1
model = Sequential()
model.add(layers.Conv2D(16, (2,2), strides=(1,1), input_shape=(225, 225, 3), activation="relu"))
model.summary()

# Stride = 2
model = Sequential()
model.add(layers.Conv2D(16, (2,2), strides=(2,2), input_shape=(225, 225, 3), activation="relu"))
model.summary()
```

### Padding

```python
# padding='valid' : no-padding, the output is smaller than the input
model = Sequential()
model.add(layers.Conv2D(16, (2,2), input_shape=(225, 225, 3), padding='valid', activation="relu"))
model.summary()

# padding='same' : padded with enough empty pixels to get an output of the same size as the input
model = Sequential()
model.add(layers.Conv2D(16, (2,2), input_shape=(225, 225, 3), padding='same', activation="relu"))
model.summary()
```

### Pooling

Reduces the size.

#### Max-pooling layer

Selects the maximum intensity value of the pixels in a subpart of the image.

#### Average-pooling operation

Selects the mean intensity value of the pixels in a subpart of the image.

✅ Good practice: Add a `MaxPool2D` after each convolution

Complete model

```python
# Complete model
model = Sequential()
model.add(layers.Conv2D(16, (2,2), input_shape=(225, 225, 3), activation="relu"))
model.add(layers.MaxPool2D(pool_size=(2,2)))
model.add(layers.Conv2D(16, (2,2), activation="relu"))
model.add(layers.MaxPool2D(pool_size=(2,2)))

model.add(layers.Flatten())
model.add(layers.Dense(6, activation='relu'))
model.add(layers.Dense(1, activation='sigmoid'))

model.summary()
```

### Summary

_Channels_: depth of an image
_Filters_: operation on an image

- Kernels
- Padding
- Stride

_Pooling_: reduce image size

Select the _filters_ and _kernel size_

- The more filters the more information and possible _overfit_
- Each filter extracts specific information from the input

- Kernel size is like a magnifying glass
- Related to the input size

## Digit recognition
